---
title: "Steve Lonegan - Defining Conservatism With The New Jersey Conservative!"
date: 2014-11-14 16:09:21
author: John Vandivier
---



<b>Tldr - Steve Lonegan demonstrates what constitutes a proper conservative.</b><br /><br />Hardcore Christian Conservative superstar talk show host Bryan Fischer interviewed a contender for a New Jersey Senate race named Steve Lonegan on Friday 6//7/2013. Clip below from the show Focal Point on AFR Talk:<br /><br />[youtube http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_BLY3enosws&amp;w=560&amp;h=315]<br /><br />Bryan is known as a hardcore conservative and he hails Lonegan as a conservative after a thorough interview. What we can do with this of course is vote for Lonegan to gain a conservative point in politics, but another thing we can do is help define conservatism. This post will examine what is considered to be conservative these days.<br /><br />1) Lonegan Criticizes the Opposition:<br />At 2:30 Lonegan criticizes his opposition as \"pro-abortion, pro-gun control, pro-gay marriage, pro-illegal immigration...supporters of Obamacare, cap and trade, Dodd-Frank, and they're all going to have to be apologists for Benghazi, the IRS scandal and the DOJ scandal...\"<br /><br />These things are what a conservative is NOT. According to Lonegan and, by virtue of his strong support, Fischer, a conservative does not support abortion, gun control, gay marriage, illegal immigration, Obamacare, cap and trade, Dodd-Frank, the way Benghazi was handled and the recent activities of the IRS and Department of Justice. I would imagine this includes all the recent Eric Holder scandals as well since the DoJ is his department.<br /><br />2) Bryan Tests Lonegan for Conservative Values:<br />At 4:00 Bryan states that his listening audience, \"primarily consists of social conservatives, economic conservatives, national defense conservatives...\" He goes on to say, \"Tell us why a social conservative, someone who believes in the sanctity of life, somebody who believes in the sanctity of marriage, somebody who believes in the nuclear family...Would want to vote for Steve Lonegan?\" Using this method of questioning which Bryan later continues with regard to other types of conservatism Bryan implies definitions of conservatism by first breaking down conservatism into subsections and then listing off the ideology of each subsection. Combining Bryan's questions with Lonegan's responses we have:<br /><br />1 Conservatives who hold at least one sub-section of conservative values and often hold all subsections in some kind of way.<br />2 Social Conservatives who are comprised of people with Evangelical Christian values.<br />3 Fiscal Conservatives, or Economic Conservatives, who are comprised of people who advocate cutting the size of government including minimizing government spending, free-market economic reform, and heavy tax reform such as an altogether elimination of the Federal Reserve.<br />4 National Defense Conservatives who are concerned with securing our boarders and combating Islam and Islamism.<br /><br />Are you a conservative by these definitions? Do you think other kinds of conservatism exist? (Hint: Yes.) While there is unlikely to be any well-known ideology which tailors exactly to the views of every person, self-identification with one or several kinds of types helps people to join networks and teams and organizations and movements which can get stuff done. So what side are you on? Or how would you modify politics to eliminate this team dynamic?