---
title: "Obama: Murderer of 90,000 Babies"
date: 2014-11-14 16:08:59
author: John Vandivier
---



A USA Today article printed in the June 19, 2013 newspaper was entitled \"House OKs Bill to Ban Abortions After 20 Weeks.\" You can also read online sources <a href=\"http://politicalticker.blogs.cnn.com/2013/06/18/house-passes-late-term-abortion-ban/comment-page-9/\">here </a>and <a href=\"http://caffeinatedthoughts.com/2013/06/u-s-house-passes-late-term-abortion-ban/\">here </a>among others.<br /><br />This house is Republican and largely conservative. They are pro-life and they represent most of the people in the US. The article goes on to mention that the Democratic Senate under Harry Reid has not scheduled a vote and does not plan to do so. Why? Not because it couldn't pass the Senate. Rather, it is because Obama has promised to veto the bill even if it does pass, so why bother?<br /><br />How on earth could anyone be opposed to late term abortion? Do you know what late term abortion is? Obama sure does. Watch this video for an overview:<br /><br />[youtube http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BkJ9ZgCq_PQ&amp;w=560&amp;h=315]<br /><br />Obama's promise not to pass the bill amounts to murder. Millions of murders. For the past 30 years in the US we have had averaged far over <a href=\"http://www.mccl.org/us-abortion-stats.html\">1.2 M abortions per year</a>. 20 weeks is considered a late term abortion. The CDC, conveniently for liberal-controlled Big Science, doesn't usually track late term abortion. In <a href=\"http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ss6015a1.htm?s_cid=ss6015a1_w\">this paper from 2008</a>, however, they made a temporary exception. Even that paper obfuscated the number of abortions at 20 weeks or later by dividing statistics at 20 weeks. They report as follows:<br /><br />\"<i>In 2008, most (62.8%) abortions were performed at ≤8 weeks' gestation, and 91.4% were performed at ≤13 weeks' gestation. Few abortions (7.3%) were performed at 14--20 weeks' gestation, and even fewer (1.3%) were performed at ≥21 weeks' gestation. During 1999--2008, the percentage of abortions performed at ≤13 weeks' gestation remained stable, whereas abortions performed at ≥16 weeks' gestation decreased 13%--17%. Moreover, among the abortions performed at ≤13 weeks' gestation, the distribution shifted toward earlier gestational ages, with the percentage of abortions performed at ≤6 weeks' gestation increasing 53%.</i>\"<br /><br />Let's calculate the number of lives that would have been saved by the bill that Obama single-handedly killed. All abortions 21 weeks or later, plus an estimate of the abortions taking place at 20 weeks. To estimate the later number will assume that 17-week abortions = the average of the 14-20 range, while 14-16 are 25% more often and 18-20 are 25% less often, in keeping with the observation of the distribution leaning toward earlier gestational ages. In other words we will assume that 20 week abortions occur half as often as 14 week abortions because, in the absence of accurate statistics, 50% is the least erroneous number to use. We therefore estimate that 20 week abortions account for (7.3%/7)*.75 = .8% of abortions. Therefore 20 week or later abortions should account for .8+1.3 = 2.1% of abortions.<br /><br />1.2 million baby murders per year nicely approximates to about .1 million baby murder per month in the US. The bill, if it was going to be passed by Obama, would likely have been brought to the Senate and passed by the end of this month, June 2013. Obama will be replaced as President when the 2016 Presidential winner takes office at the end of January 2017. Let's be very generous to Obama and say that he is only directly responsible for those baby murders which actually occur during his presidency. We are being generous in this because the reality is that he is setting a precedent that will extend beyond his presidency, and that even if the next President wanted to immediately fix the problem it would still take significant time to get the appropriate bills back through the house again. From the start of July 2013 until the end of January 2017 would be 7 + 36 = 42 months of Obama directly killing babies.<br /><br />Let's again be generous and ignore the fact that passing the pro-life bill would create a pro-life precedent in the country and would end up saving many more lives than the ones it directly protects. This is generous to Obama because I could argue that he is also killing those other babies.<br /><br />(.1 million babies per month killed by abortion)*(42 months)*(.021 babies that Obama has directly killed per baby that abortions in general kill) = <br /><br />90,000 babies. 90,000 babies will die because of the veto of this legislation, or even the threat of veto which gives the Senate a reason not to schedule the vote.<br /><br />We all sure like to blame Obama don't we? It's easy! It wasn't me it was him! Well Obama is largely, even directly, to blame for many of our country's problems, but he's not the only one. He had to get support and votes from somewhere. This month think about writing your Congressman or Senator. Consider volunteering for <a href=\"http://thegenerallifeblog.blogspot.com/2013/02/go-life-for-beyonce.html\">pro-life</a> efforts or engaging in some super easy online activism. Consider committing to vote only for <a href=\"http://thegenerallifeblog.blogspot.com/2013/06/steve-lonegan-defining-conservatism.html\">conservative candidates</a> and <a href=\"http://thegenerallifeblog.blogspot.com/2013/06/this-juneteenth-lets-discuss-real.html\">leaving the Democratic Party</a>. These are all things we can do to help. Consider not watching TV anymore. Not the news, not the pop culture shows and not even the supposedly \"conservative\" Fox network. It's all garbage. Instead, <a href=\"http://thegenerallifeblog.blogspot.com/2013/04/my-top-7-decision-making-tools.html\">go on an information diet</a> and soon you will be a powerhouse of mental ability, able to make strong steps in changing not only your own life but even the entire culture!