---
title: "Identifying Key Papers in the Economics of Education"
date: 2017-05-01
author: John Vandivier
status: publish
---

This article documents how I went about identifying key papers as a starting point in researching the economics of education.\r\n\r\nOrganization:\r\n<ol>\r\n 	<li>Motivation</li>\r\n 	<li>Approach</li>\r\n 	<li>Results</li>\r\n</ol>\r\n<strong>Motivation</strong>\r\n\r\nFirst, let me give some motivation and background. I'm in the early stages of dissertation writing and my primary interest is in the economics of education. In particular, I am interested in alternative credentials, but I am attempting to broaden to education in general because I have had a tough time locating data for alternative credentials. I have also been encouraged by others to publish on certain more traditional topics including the use of vouchers. I think it's important to listen to others during research. I don't buy the lone scholar approach.\r\n\r\nAs an economist, I am looking for ways to improve education outcomes. This may mean increasing investment where the ROI is positive, and it may mean implementing austerity to combat waste. In determining ROI, I need to investigate the education literature to come up with reasonable measures of education and factors of performance among other things. I seek common approaches, measures, and conclusions. I also seek open questions.\r\n\r\n<strong>Approach</strong>\r\n\r\nMy initial approach was to create 5 categories of interesting papers, and attempt to find at least 5 papers in each category. This results in a first-pass goal of 25 papers.\r\n\r\nHere are the categories:\r\n<ol>\r\n 	<li>Recent papers in top journals of education</li>\r\n 	<li>Highly regarded education papers, in terms of cites/year, regardless of journal or time</li>\r\n 	<li>Recent papers in top economics journals regarding education</li>\r\n 	<li>Highly regarded papers in the economics of education, in terms of cites/year, regardless of journal or time</li>\r\n 	<li>Highly regarded papers on the psychology of learning and education, in terms of cites/year, regardless of journal or time</li>\r\n</ol>\r\nFirst I do a bit of research to identify the top journals of interest. This is discussed in the results section. The journal research happens first to yield some keywords with which I can conduct a Google Scholar query using Harzing's Publish or Perish. The query identifies the highly regarded papers in terms of citations. After some journals were identified, I looked over their recent articles in the following way:\r\n<ol>\r\n 	<li>Scan the titles of each published article in the 3 most recent publications</li>\r\n 	<li>If the title caught my eye, read the abstract</li>\r\n 	<li>Read a minimum of 3 abstracts per journal</li>\r\n 	<li>If the abstract has my interest, quickly scan the article.</li>\r\n 	<li>If it still looks interesting, add it to my list of interesting articles. Add a brief note about why I liked it.</li>\r\n</ol>\r\nAfter that I proceed to use Harzing's Publish or Perish to identify the other articles. Overall, here's what I'm looking for in the papers:\r\n<ol>\r\n 	<li>Keywords</li>\r\n 	<li>Author names</li>\r\n 	<li>Research designs</li>\r\n 	<li>Open and closed questions</li>\r\n 	<li>Interesting prior papers, via citations. In particular, citations in common</li>\r\n 	<li>Evidence related to my current questions\r\n<ol>\r\n 	<li>Economics of alternative credentials</li>\r\n 	<li>An ABM of voucher efficacy</li>\r\n 	<li>An ABM of higher education enrollment and graduation</li>\r\n 	<li>Methods of improving student and teacher performance. In particular, malleability of traits or behaviors.\r\n<ol>\r\n 	<li>For example, can we train students and teachers to be gritty and conscientious?</li>\r\n</ol>\r\n</li>\r\n</ol>\r\n</li>\r\n</ol>\r\n<strong>Results</strong>\r\n\r\nWhile performing the research, I obtained far more than 25 papers. As a result, I only identify the interesting journals in this section.\r\n\r\n<a href=\"http://www.afterecon.com/economics-and-finance/economics-education-reviewing-content-key-papers/\">See this article</a> for the list of specific and interesting articles found, as well as brief notes about why each item was considered interesting.\r\n\r\nAccording to <a href=\"http://www.scimagojr.com/journalrank.php?category=3304\">Scimago Journal Rankings for Education</a>, these are the top 10 journals in education:\r\n<ol>\r\n 	<li>Journal of Engineering Education (SJR indicator = 6.18)</li>\r\n 	<li>American Educational Research Journal</li>\r\n 	<li>Journal of Research in Science Teaching</li>\r\n 	<li>American Journal of Education</li>\r\n 	<li>Internet and Higher Education</li>\r\n 	<li>Review of Educational Research</li>\r\n 	<li>Journal of the Learning Sciences</li>\r\n 	<li>Journal of Teacher Education</li>\r\n 	<li>Computers and Education</li>\r\n 	<li>Child Development (SJR indicator = 3.08)</li>\r\n</ol>\r\nAlso of interest is #12, which deals directly with questions of education policy: <em>Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis</em>.\r\n\r\nHere are the top 5 <a href=\"https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_access_journal\">open access journals</a>:\r\n<ol>\r\n 	<li>Journal of Education Policy (SJR indicator = 2.36)</li>\r\n 	<li>Practical Assessment, Research and Evaluation</li>\r\n 	<li>Medical Education</li>\r\n 	<li>Educational Technology Research and Development</li>\r\n 	<li>International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning (SJR indicator = 1.35)</li>\r\n</ol>\r\nFrom this pool of journals, I identified these of interest to me:\r\n<ol>\r\n 	<li>Journal of Engineering Education\r\n<ol>\r\n 	<li>Although I don't care about engineering, the rank and SJR indicators are so high I want to take a look.</li>\r\n</ol>\r\n</li>\r\n 	<li>American Educational Research Journal</li>\r\n 	<li>American Journal of Education</li>\r\n 	<li>Internet and Higher Education\r\n<ol>\r\n 	<li>Because of my special interest in alternative credentials.</li>\r\n</ol>\r\n</li>\r\n 	<li>Review of Educational Research</li>\r\n 	<li>Journal of the Learning Sciences</li>\r\n 	<li>Child Development\r\n<ol>\r\n 	<li>Because cognitive development is known to play a special role in education.</li>\r\n</ol>\r\n</li>\r\n 	<li>Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis</li>\r\n 	<li>Journal of Education Policy</li>\r\n 	<li>Educational Technology Research and Development</li>\r\n</ol>\r\nI didn't find any interesting open access journals in economics, but here are the top 10 economics journals:\r\n<ol>\r\n 	<li>Quarterly Journal of Economics</li>\r\n 	<li>Journal of Finance</li>\r\n 	<li>Econometrica</li>\r\n 	<li>Review of Financial Studies</li>\r\n 	<li>Journal of Financial Economics</li>\r\n 	<li>Journal of Economic Literature</li>\r\n 	<li>Review of Economic Studies</li>\r\n 	<li>American Economic Journal: Applied Economics</li>\r\n 	<li>American Economic Review</li>\r\n 	<li>Journal of Political Economy</li>\r\n</ol>\r\nBecause my interest is not finance, I want to exclude the <em>Review of Financial Studies </em>and <em>Journal of Financial Economics</em>.\r\n\r\nI'll include the <em>Journal of Finance</em> due to it's high rank.\r\n\r\nTwo other journals of interest, bringing the total to 10, include #17, <em>American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics </em>and #19, <em>American Economic Journal: Economic Policy</em>.\r\n\r\nThe result is a list of 20 interesting journals. The next step is to dive into the papers themselves. As mentioned, <a href=\"http://www.afterecon.com/economics-and-finance/economics-education-reviewing-content-key-papers/\">see this article</a> for those details.